DOC - Add tutorial for Cox datafit (#163)
scikit-learn-contrib/skglm: doc/tutorials/cox_datafit.rst

.. _maths_cox_datafit:

=============================
Mathematic behind Cox datafit
=============================

This tutorial presents the mathematics behind Cox datafit using both Breslow and Efron estimate. 

Problem setup
=============

Let's consider a typical survival analysis setup with

- :math:`\mathbf{X} \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times p}` is a matrix of :math:`p` predictors and :math:`n` samples :math:`x_i \in \mathbb{R}^p`
- :math:`y \in \mathbb{R}^n` a vector recording the time of events occurrences
- :math:`s \in \{ 0, 1 \}^n` a binary vector (observation censorship) where :math:`1` means *event occurred*

> where we are interested in estimating the vector of coefficient :math:`\beta \in \mathbb{R}^p`.

Reviewer: the vectors of coefficients (plural) :math:`\beta \in \mathbb{R}^p`. such that ... (otherwise we don't know how beta is related to X and y

> 

Reviewer: add a sentence here to state that you'll treat two estimates : first the Breslow estimate, then the Efron estimate to handle ties in y.

Breslow estimate
================

Datafit expression
------------------

> To get the expression of the Cox datafit, we refer to the expression of the negative log-likelihood according to Breslow estimate [`1`_, Section 2]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get the expression of the Cox datafit, we refer to the expression of the negative log-likelihood according to the Breslow estimate [`1`_, Section 2]
```

.. math::
    :label: breslow-estimate

    l(\beta) = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} -s_i \langle x_i, \beta \rangle + s_i \log(\sum_{y_j \geq y_i} e^{\langle x_j, \beta \rangle})
    .

> Ideally, we ought to have a vectorized expression to ease gradient and Hessian derivation.

Author: Agree!

.. note::

    Having a vectorized expression would enable us to leverage ``Numpy`` broadcasting and vectorization
    and gain in terms of efficiency.

We introduce the matrix :math:`mathbf{B} \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times n}` defined as :math:`\mathbf{B}_{i, j} = \mathbb{1}_{y_j \geq y_i} = 1` if :math:`y_j \geq y_i` and :math:`0` otherwise.

> We notice that the first term in the sum can we rewritten as

Reviewer: in the sum in (1)

.. math::

    \sum_{i=1}^{n} -s_i \langle x_i, \beta \rangle = -\langle s, \mathbf{X}\beta \rangle
    ,

> whereas the second term

Reviewer: ```suggestion
whereas the second term writes
```

.. math::

    \sum_{i=1}^n s_i \log(\sum_{y_j \geq y_i} e^{\langle x_j, \beta \rangle}) = \sum_{i=1}^n s_i \log(\sum_{j=1}^n \mathbb{1}_{y_j \geq y_i} e^{\langle x_j, \beta \rangle}) = \langle s, \log(\mathbf{B}e^{\mathbf{X}\beta}) \rangle
    ,

where the :math:`\log` is performed element-wise. Therefore we deduce the expression of Cox datafit

.. math::
    :label: vectorized-cox-breslow

    l(\beta) =  -\frac{1}{n} \langle s, \mathbf{X}\beta \rangle + \frac{1}{n} \langle s, \log(\mathbf{B}e^{\mathbf{X}\beta}) \rangle
    .

> We observe from this vectorized reformulation that Cox datafit depends only :math:`\mathbf{X}\beta`. On the one hand, this illustrate that it fits well the GLM framework. On the other, now on, we can focus the simplified function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We observe from this vectorized reformulation that the Cox datafit only depends on :math:`\mathbf{X}\beta`. Hence we can focus on the function
```

.. math::
    :label: simple-function

    F(u) = -\frac{1}{n} \langle s, u \rangle + \frac{1}{n} \langle s, \log(\mathbf{B}e^u) \rangle
    ,

to derive the gradient and Hessian.

Gradient and Hessian
--------------------

> Now that we have a vectorized expression of the datafit, we can apply the chain rule to derive its gradient and Hessian.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We apply the chain rule to derive its gradient and Hessian.
```

> For some :math:`u \in \mathbb{R}^n`, The gradient is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For :math:`u \in \mathbb{R}^n`, the gradient is
```

.. math::
    :label: raw-gradient

    \nabla F(u) = -\frac{1}{n} s + \frac{1}{n} [\text{diag}(e^u)\mathbf{B}^\top] \frac{s}{\mathbf{B}e^u}
    ,

and the Hessian reads

.. math::
    :label: raw-hessian

    \nabla^2 F(u) = \frac{1}{n} \text{diag}(e^u) \text{diag}(\mathbf{B}^\top \frac{s}{\mathbf{B}e^u}) - \frac{1}{n} \text{diag}(e^u) \mathbf{B}^\top \text{diag}(\frac{s}{(\mathbf{B}e^u)^2})\mathbf{B}\text{diag}(e^u)
    ,

> where the fraction and the square operations are performed element-wise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where the division and the square operations are performed element-wise.
```

> The Hessian, as it is, is costly to evaluate because of the right hand-side term. In particular, the latter involves a :math:`\mathcal{O}(n^3)` operations. We overcome this limitation by deriving a diagonal upper bound on the Hessian.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Hessian, as it is, is costly to evaluate because of the right hand-side term. In particular, the latter involves a :math:`\mathcal{O}(n^3)` operations. We overcome this limitation by using a diagonal upper bound on the Hessian.
```

We construct such an upper bound by noticing that

> #. the function :math:`F` is convex and hence :math:`\nabla^2 F(u)` is positive semi-definite

Reviewer: I'm not sure this comes into play: since the second term is pos def, by definition it means 6 (A precceq B means B - A succeq 0, which is the case). No?

#. the second term is positive semi-definite.

Therefore, we have,

.. math::
    :label: diagonal-upper-bound

>     \nabla^2 F(u) \leq \frac{1}{n} \text{diag}(e^u) \text{diag}(\mathbf{B}^\top \frac{s}{\mathbf{B}e^u})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \nabla^2 F(u) \preceq \frac{1}{n} \text{diag}(e^u) \text{diag}(\mathbf{B}^\top \frac{s}{\mathbf{B}e^u})
```

    ,

> where the inequality applies on the eigenvalues.

Reviewer: where the inequality is the Loewner order on symmetric positive definite matrices ? because it does not apply to the eigenvalues (not really defined)

Author: Fair enough! Loewner's order is the appropriate name for inequality.

I have a small concern if we abide by Loewner's order definition, then this https://github.com/scikit-learn-contrib/skglm/pull/163#discussion_r1222574328 comes into play. I think we need to mention the convexity of F to have a positive semi-definite Hessian?

.. note::

>     Having a diagonal Hessian would reduce the cost of evaluating the Hessian to :math:`\mathcal{O}(n)` instead of :math:`\mathcal{O}(n^3)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Having a diagonal Hessian reduces Hessian computation cost to :math:`\mathcal{O}(n)` instead of :math:`\mathcal{O}(n^3)`.
```

>     A byproduct of that is also reducing the cost of evaluating matrix-vector operations involving the Hessian to :math:`\mathcal{O}(n)` instead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It also reduces the cost of  Hessian-vector multiplication to :math:`\mathcal{O}(n)` instead
```

    of :math:`\mathcal{O}(n^2)`.

Efron estimate
==============

Datafit expression
------------------

> Efron estimate refines Breslow by handling tied observations, *observations with identical occurrences' time*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Efron estimate refines Breslow by handling tied observations (*observations with identical occurrences' time*).
```

    .

On the other hand, the minus term within :math:`\log` can be rewritten as a linear term in :math:`mathbf{X}\beta`

.. math::

    - \frac{\#(i) - 1}{| H_{i_l} |}\sum_{j \in H_{i_l}} e^{\langle x_j, \beta \rangle} 
        = \sum_{j=1}^{n} -\frac{\#(i) - 1}{| H_{i_l} |} \ \mathbb{1}_{j \in H_{i_l}} \ e^{\langle x_j, \beta \rangle}
        = \sum_{j=1}^n a_{i,j} e^{\langle x_j, \beta \rangle}
        = \langle a_i, e^{\mathbf{X}\beta} \rangle
        ,

where :math:`a_i` is a vector in :math:`\mathbb{R}^n` chosen accordingly to preform the linear operation.

By defining the matrix :math:`\mathbf{A}` with rows :math:`(a_i)_{i \in [n]}`, we deduce the final expression

.. math::
    :label: vectorized-cox-efron

    l(\beta) =  -\frac{1}{n} \langle s, \mathbf{X}\beta \rangle +\frac{1}{n} \langle s, \log(\mathbf{B}e^{\mathbf{X}\beta} - \mathbf{A}e^{\mathbf{X}\beta}) \rangle
    .

Algorithm 1 provides an efficient procedure to evaluate :math:`\mathbf{A}v` for some :math:`v` in :math:`\mathbb{R}^n`.

> .. image:: /_static/images/cox-tutorial/A_dot_v.png

Reviewer: nice

    :width: 400
    :align: center
    :alt: Algorithm 1 to evaluate A dot v

Gradient and Hessian
--------------------

> Now that we casted the Efron estimate in form similar to `<vectorized-cox-breslow>`_, the evaluation of gradient and the diagonal upper of the Hessian reduces to to subtracting a linear term. Algorithm  2 provides an efficient procedure to evaluate :math:`\mathbf{A}^\top v` for some :math:`v` in :math:`\mathbb{R}^n`.

Reviewer: double "to"

> Now that we casted the Efron estimate in form similar to `<vectorized-cox-breslow>`_, the evaluation of gradient and the diagonal upper of the Hessian reduces to to subtracting a linear term. Algorithm  2 provides an efficient procedure to evaluate :math:`\mathbf{A}^\top v` for some :math:`v` in :math:`\mathbb{R}^n`.

Reviewer: casted > cast (irregular)

.. image:: /_static/images/cox-tutorial/A_transpose_dot_v.png
    :width: 400
    :align: center
    :alt: Algorithm 1 to evaluate A transpose dot v

.. note::

>     We notice that the complexity of both algorithms is :math:`\mathcal{O}(n)` despite intervening a matrix multiplication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    We notice that the complexity of both algorithms is :math:`\mathcal{O}(n)` despite involving a matrix multiplication.
```
